# Lesson 1 - Types of Data Science Questions

## Descriptive
* Describe a set of data.
* Census Data
* Descriptions cannot be generalized without statistical models.
* Census Data, Google Ngram Viewer

## Exploratory
* Find relationships you didn't know about
* Discovering new connections
* Define future studies
* Should not be used for generalizing / predicting
* Correlation does not imply causation
* Sloan digital sky survey

## Inferential
* Uses relatively small sample of data to say something about bigger population.
* Inference is commonly the goal of statistical models.
* Inference involves estimating both the quantity you care about and your uncertainty about your estimate.
* Inference depends heavily on both the population and the sampling scheme.
* Effect of Air Polution control in Life Expectancy in the US

## Predictive
* Use the data on some objects to predict values for another object.
* If X predicts Y it does not mean X causes Y.
* Accurate prediction depends heavily on measuring right variables.
* Although there are better and worse prediction models, more data and a simple model works really well.
* Prediction is very hard, especially about future references.
* FiveThrityEight Election Forecast, Target pregnant teen girl.

## Causal
* Find out what happens to one variable when you make another variable change.
* Usually randomized studies are required to identify causation.
* There are approaches to inferring causation in non-randomized studies, but they are complicated and sensitive assumptions.
* Causal relationships are usaully identified as average effects, but may not apply to every individual.
* Causal models are usually the "gold standard" for data analysis.
* Fecal transplants for Recurrent Clostridium Dificile

## Mechanistic
* Understand the exact changes in variables that lead to changes in other variables for individial objects.
* Incredibly hard to infer, except in simple situations.
* Usually modeled by a deterministic set of equations (physical / engineering science)
* Generally the random component of the data is measurement error.
* If the equations are known but the parameters are not, they may be inferred with data analysis.
* Empirical Pavement Design

# Lesson 2 - What is Data?
Date are values of qualitative or quantitative variables, belonging to a set of items.
**Set of items: Sometimes called the population; the set of objects you are interested in.**
**Variables: A measurement or characteristic of an item.**
**Qualitative: Country of origin, sex, treatment, etc.**
**Quantitative: Height, weight, blood pressure, etc.**
What does data look like?
* Ordered text
* Unordered text
* Images
* Audio
* Json files from API
* Rarely the file is easy to read.
The data is the second most important thing, the most important thing in data science is the question you are trying to answer.
Often data will limit or enable questions, but having data can't save you if you don't have a question.

# Lesson 3 - What about Big Data
Data sets that are so big that can't be analyzed locally.
You need the right data:
"The data may not contain the answer. The combination of some data and an aching desire for an answer does not ensure that a reasobable anwer can be extracted from a given body of data..."

# Lesson 4 - Experimental Design
* Know and Care about the analysis plan.
* Have a plan for data and code sharing... Leek group [data sharing plan](https://github.com/jtleek/datasharing)
* Formulate your question in advance
* Statistical Inference:
	* Population -> Probability -> Sample / Descriptive Statistics -> Inferential Statistics

## Randomizing and Blocking
* If you can (and want to) fix a variable.
* If you don't fix a variable, stratify it. If you are testing sign-up phrases and have two colors, use both phrases equally on both colors.
* If you can't fix the variable, randomize it.

## Prediction
* Probability / sampling -> Training set -> Build a predictive function.
* Prediction is slightly more challenging than inference.
* Prediction key quantities:
	* Sensitivity
	* Specificity
	* Positive Predictive Value
	* Negative Predictive Value
	* Accuracy

## Summary
* Good experiments:
	* Have replication
	* Measure viability
	* Generalize to the problem you care about
	* Are transparent
* Predictions is not inference
	* Both can be important
* Beware data dredging
